---
title: Brick by Brick
category: personal
tags: adhd strategy
---

In thinking through my [most recent](https://github.com/DrGylfin/brehon) development project, I was mainly taking stock of how I went into it mentally, and to what extent these changes were effective or not.

Having ADHD, it's very easy for me to get excited about a project only to rapidly lose all interest.  Frustration tolerance is also an issue.  So needless to say I've dabbled in coding for years, but actually *finishing* a project has proven a lot harder than starting one.  I typically run into some kind of wall in terms of not being able to figure out how to do what I want to do, or some documentation doesn't gel for me, or whatever.  Recognizing these things, after a pretty significant break from development, I decided to try some different strategies.  Clearly my default of just throwing myself at something until I bounce off wasn't working.

Some or all of these may seem stupidly obvious, but not if your brain works the way mine does.

## Pre-planning

I have a bad habit of just jumping into a project or task, without really thinking about what I have to do.  This causes two main problems.  First, it's easy for me to get distracted by the newest idea to pop into my head.  In the case of development, it's sort of like mental feature creep: as soon as I come up with a new feature I want to add, I start trying to implement it.  But then something else new pops into my head, so I stop what I was doing and start implementing *that*, and the cycle continues.  As anyone who's tried to program knows, this also means that I have to end up re-doing a lot of stuff because I do features in isolation rather than in a broader context.

Second, this leads to getting easily overwhelmed, because I'm suddenly trying to do all my planning in the moment.  It just results in a steadily increasing number of variables, as each decision raises more questions that in turn have to be answered, and rapidly gets out of control.

In thinking about this more, I realize that a lot of my resistence to some of the more "boring" tasks that I have to do in my daily life is actually a result of not doing this.  Even putting things away can spiral quickly, since usually I have a pile of stuff in an inconvenient place simply because I don't have anywhere else to put it.

This ties into my next realization.

## MVP

MVP, short for "minimum viable product," is basically the bare minimum functionality.  By organizing my planning around this idea, it means I focus on the most important things, and don't get side-tracked by less important (and/or more difficult) functionality.  I'm a sucker for good UI design, for example, but there's no point in getting into the weeds of that aspect of a program until it can do what I want it to.  Especially if I end up adding things I hadn't planned for, which could then throw off the UI completely.

## Re-framing the steps

Traditionally, I've seen the steps towards a given goal as not really worth anything in and of themselves.  It's like my mental model is a binary: either I've done the Thing or not, and I don't do a good job of registering progress in the meantime.  So I tried to be more conscious of this going in, and by having discrete sub-steps already planned out, it was much easier for me to see checking one of them off as an accomplishment in and of itself.

This had an additional bonus of letting me pause work more readily, or even do something compeletely different when I needed a break or simply wanted to.  Being able to do something other than whatever the new and exciting thing on my plate happens to be is a big improvement.

I'm still not fully sure what I did differently here, other than recognizing the problem and being conscious of it as I planned/worked on my project.

---

There's a certain irony in that it was the *process* of building something to help me with one aspect of ADHD (trouble prioritizing or making decisions between perceived equals) that itself helped me understand far better how I need to approach getting something done.  But breakthroughs can come from unexpected sources.